Announcing jco 1.0 (#87)
bytecodealliance/bytecodealliance.org: _posts/2024-02-19-jco-1.0.md

---
title: "Announcing Jco 1.0"
author: "Yosh Wuyts"
date: "2024-02-19"
github_name: "yoshuawuyts"
excerpt_separator: <!--end_excerpt-->
---

We’re happy to announce the 1.0 release of [jco]: a native Javascript
WebAssembly runtime and toolchain built for WebAssembly Components. Jco can
natively run Wasm Components inside of Node.js, making it easier to take

> libraries written in different programming languages, and execute them using the

Reviewer: no comma

Node.js runtime. And by implementing [WASI
0.2](https://bytecodealliance.org/articles/WASI-0.2), those components can
access the network, filesystem, and other system APIs available in the Node.js
runtime.

<!--end_excerpt-->

Our goal is for jco to be a comprehensive tool for all Wasm-related operations
for JavaScript. With Jco 1.0 we're stabilizing the Node.js Wasm Component
runtime, as well as the toolchain to take Wasm Components written in other

> languages, and import them from JavaScript. What is also included but not yet

Reviewer: no comma

> stable are: the browser runtime for Wasm Components, and the JavaScript to Wasm

Reviewer: no comma

Component compiler. This functionality can already be used experimentally, but
needs additional work to bring it up to the standard we expect.

## JavaScript Toolchains in the Bytecode Alliance

> Jco is the third JS toolchain project which is part of the bytecode alliance. To

Reviewer: caps: Bytecode Alliance.

help people navigate this, here is a quick overview of the three projects, and
what their purpose is:

- [Javy](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/javy): A JavaScript → WASI

> toolchain built for WASI 0.1. This work predates Wasm Components.

Reviewer: worth asking Saul whether it intends to add component support, and then say that here.

Author: cc/ @saulecabrera

Reviewer 2: I think it's worth mentioning, yeah, that even though Javy predates Wasm Components, we'll want to add support for them eventually.

Author: ty, updated the text!

- [ComponentizeJS](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/ComponentizeJS): A
JavaScript → WASI toolchain built for WASI 0.2 and Wasm Components. This project
is newer, and less mature than Javy.
- [Jco](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/jco): A comprehensive WASI compiler
toolchain and runtime for JavaScript. This includes a WASI → JS toolchain built
for WASI 0.2 and Wasm Components.

The goal is for Jco to be the only toolchain you need when working with
JavaScript/TypeScript and WASI. And in the future we intend to stabilize the

> `jco componentize` subcommand which uses the ComponentizeJS project internally.

Reviewer: you don't really give instructions, just information. Say something about _what they should think now_: "The command `jco componentize` uses ComponentizeJS under the covers, so as jco matures you shouldn't have to think about ComponentizeJS much, if at all."

Or something like that.

Author: Oh I like that much better; ty!

```bash
$ npm install -g @bytecodealliance/jco        # Install the jco cli tool
$ npm install @bytecodealliance/preview2-shim # Install the jco WASI runtime as a local dep
$ cargo install cargo-component               # Install the `cargo component` subcommand
```

We can then proceed to create a new project repository, which has both Rust and JS code:

```sh
$ cargo component new playground-jco --lib # Create a new Rust component
$ cd playground-jco                        # Enter the newly created project
$ npm init -y                              # Setup a Node.js environment
$ touch index.js                           # Create a JS entrypoint
$ echo node_modules >> .gitignore          # Add node_modules to our .gitignore file
```

This should leave you with a structure that roughly looks like this:

```bash
src/lib.rs      # Our Rust library entry point
wit/world.wit   # Contains our WIT IDL definitions
Cargo.toml      # Configures our Rust project
index.js        # Our JS binary entry point
package.json    # Configures our JS Project
```

And with that out of the way, we're ready to begin writing some code!

### Defining the WIT interface

> There are three steps to this project: defining the WIT interface, writing the

Reviewer: Somewhere in this WIT discussion you might consider suggesting they use https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=bytecodealliance.wit-idl to get pretty formatting for the WIT, which helps readability when you're learning how to define components using this language.

Author: ohh, nice!

Author: just realized I didn't have it installed either - ty for pointing me to that!

Rust code to be exported, and writing the JS code to be imported. We'll be
starting with the WIT interface. For those of you new to Wasm Components: WIT is

> an Interface Definition Language (IDL) which allows you to describe programming

Reviewer: _define_? describe isn't wrong, of course..... standard header/class language has _define_ for the interface or structural definition, and _implementation_ for the thing that makes it go. :-) Your post, your choice.

Author: wikipedia says "describe", so I'm not going to argue. ty for catching that!

interfaces in a declarative, language agnostic way. Let's define an interface
which takes a regular string, and converts it to [SHOUTING CASE!!1!](https://github.com/badboy/stdshout).

```wit
package my-org:wit-playground

world playground {
  export scream: func(input: string) -> string;
}
```

We can save this to the generated `wit/world.wit` file [^cc-gen], and now we
have defined a function `scream` which takes a string, and returns a string. And
with that, it's time to write our Rust code!

[^cc-gen]: If you're from the future: `cargo-component` generated this file for
us in this location. Since it is not yet advertised as "stable", the output
location for WIT files may change. If no `wit/world.wit` file was generated for
you, please check a different location to see whether it might be somewhere else.

### Writing a Rust library

As mentioned, we're using the `cargo-component` tool here in this example to
compile our Rust code to Wasm Components. It isn't yet at 1.0, but it *does*
work pretty well. So we'll show you how you can use it today. If you're from the
future (e.g. not February 2024), please check the `cargo-component` docs to see

> how to follow these steps. Roughly speaking what we're going to do is: take

Reviewer: "to see if -- and if so how -- these steps have changed."

Reviewer: "and if so, how --" is better

that code right now - it does a lot of heavy lifting so we don't have to. The
important part is that it provides us with traits which we can implement. So
let's implement those in our code, and write a little upper case function

```rust
mod bindings;                                     // Teach our program about `src/bindings.rs`

use bindings::Guest;                              // Import the trait repr of our WIT world
use wit_bindgen::rt::string::String as WitString; // Import the WIT string type

struct Component;                                 // Define the type to export
impl Guest for Component {                        // Import the WIT world + methods
    fn scream(input: WitString) -> WitString {    // Implement our `scream` method
        let mut s = input.to_uppercase();
        s.push_str("!!1!");
        s.into()
    }
}
```

Now if we re-run `cargo component check`, it should compile without any
warnings. That means we're ready to run:

```bash
$ cargo component build      # Compile our Rust library to a Wasm Component
```

This will have written the generated Wasm code to
`target/wasm32-wasi/debug/playground_jco.wasm`. Once Rust lands support for a

> native Preview 2 target, expect this to change to

Reviewer: "native WASI 0.2.0 target"? dunno; but if we're using WASI 0.2.0 up top, keep it consistent to teach the readers the new language. One or the other.

You can also introduce the concept that "WASI Preview 2" is the same thing as "WASI 0.2.0" but we'll be using the latter going forward. Up to you.

 - target/jco/interfaces/wasi-filesystem-types.d.ts     2.71 KiB
 - target/jco/interfaces/wasi-io-error.d.ts             0.08 KiB
 - target/jco/interfaces/wasi-io-streams.d.ts           0.58 KiB
 - target/jco/playground_jco.core.wasm                  1.83 MiB
 - target/jco/playground_jco.core2.wasm                 16.5 KiB
 - target/jco/playground_jco.d.ts                       0.72 KiB
 - target/jco/playground_jco.js                           40 KiB
```

The next step is to import this into our Node.js file. In order to do this, we
first have to update our `package.json` to declare that we're writing a JS
module. In our package.json, add the following line:

```json
{
  "type": "module",
}
```

And then finally, we're ready to write some JS code. we're going to import the
`scream` function from our Rust library, pass it a string, and then print the
output of the string.

```js
import { scream } from "./target/jco/playground_jco.js";

let msg = scream("chashu would like some tuna");
console.log(msg);
```

Now if we run this using `node index.js`, we should get the following output:

```text
CHASHU WOULD LIKE SOME TUNA!!1!
```

> And with that, we've successfully written our first Rust component for Node.js.

Reviewer: Very important, to me at least, is the idea that you can swap out ANY language component here that implements the same interface. So you should mention the variations that the component model gives you here: that you could implement the same WIT definition in Go and the same index.js file would work; that the same workflow would work for JavaScript, and so on. 

Up to you.

Author: good call; done!

You can give yourself a little round of applause - because this is *incredibly
cool*! By leveraging WIT and Wasm, we've been able to define a language-agnostic
interface which resulted in strongly typed code for both programming languages.
And by leveraging code generation, all of the hard FFI and data marshalling bits
have been handled for us - enabling us to focus on what is truly important
(screaming we want tuna).

This is just a taste of what Wasm, WASI, jco, and language toolchains can do.
The [latest version of WASI](https://bytecodealliance.org/articles/WASI-0.2)
(0.2.0) provides among other things access to asynchronous sockets, timers, and
http. Using the same broad techniques we've shown in this post, it should for example be
possible to write your own polyglot networked applications, today.

## Conclusion

In this post we’ve introduce jco 1.0.0: a native JavaScript runtime which can

> run WASI 0.2.0 components. We’ve discussed what has been stabilized, which

Reviewer: See, here it's WASI 0.2.0 again. One or the other, or both to help with translations between them.

---
title: "Announcing Jco 1.0"
author: "Yosh Wuyts"
date: "2024-02-21"
github_name: "yoshuawuyts"
excerpt_separator: <!--end_excerpt-->
---

We’re happy to announce the 1.0 release of [jco]: a native Javascript

> WebAssembly runtime and toolchain built for WebAssembly Components. Jco can

Reviewer 3: I'd feel much more comfortable if we could call it an `experimental transpilation-based runtime` but I guess that doesn't exactly roll off the tongue.

At the very least perhaps we can call it a toolchain first:

```suggestion
We’re happy to announce the 1.0 release of [jco]: a native Javascript
WebAssembly toolchain and experimental Node.js runtime built for WebAssembly Components. Jco can
```

Author: > I'd feel much more comfortable if we could call it an `experimental transpilation-based runtime` but I guess that doesn't exactly roll off the tongue.

Yeah; that also leads to questions such as: "if Jco is experimental, why is it at 1.0 already?" We know that 1.0 means API-stable, not necessarily battle-tested - but that's probably too nuanced to communicate in an announcement post.

I think leaving off the "experimental" prefix, and being careful about the claims we're making should be enough to let people interested in this evaluate for themselves whether it meets their expectations. I suspect for a lot of folks it will already!

> natively run Wasm Components inside of Node.js, making it easier to take
> libraries written in different programming languages and execute them using the
> Node.js runtime. And by implementing [WASI

Reviewer 3: How about something like:

```suggestion
natively run Wasm Components on JavaScript using transpilation, making it easy to take
libraries written in different programming languages and execute them using the
Node.js runtime. And by implementing [WASI
```

Author: Right now we only support Node.js; I think it's really important to correctly set expectations from the outset about what it is we're stabilizing. In the next paragraph we cover what is coming next, which includes support for other Javascript runtimes (including the browser).

Reviewer 3: Yeah agreed, thanks for clarifying.

0.2](https://bytecodealliance.org/articles/WASI-0.2), those components can
access the network, filesystem, and other system APIs available in the Node.js

> runtime.

Reviewer 3: Should we mention Preview 2 conformance - "with full conformance against the WASI 0.2.0 features`?

Author: I'm not sure how that is meaningfully different from what I've written here? What I wrote is: "implementing WASI 0.2" and linked to the WASI 0.2 post. You're suggesting we instead write: "full conformance against WASI 0.2 features".

I'm a little hesitant to use words like "conformance" if we don't also describe WASI 0.2 as a "specification". Again, as part of the in-group we understand the nuance of the WASI Subgroup vs the WebAssembly W3C WG's formal specifications. But given how careful we've been in our messaging so far, I'd prefer it if we stay clear from using words like "conformance" and stay closer to "we implement WASI 0.2" or "we provide WASI 0.2 interfaces", etc.

Author: I just added a footnote explaining what Wasm Components are vs what WASI 0.2 is. Hopefully that will help a little with this.

Reviewer 3: The important point here I think is that we don't just implement "a bit of WASI" - but that we have spend months of engineering work ensuring we **fully support WASI**. That's a really key point to get across, that this is the whole thing, and it's fully stable. As opposed to being at the trailer of one sentence in the post.

Author: ok; changed the phrasing to match!

<!--end_excerpt-->

> Our goal is for jco to be a comprehensive tool for all Wasm-related operations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Our goal is for jco to be a comprehensive tool for all component-related operations
```

for JavaScript. With Jco 1.0 we're stabilizing the Node.js Wasm Component

> runtime, as well as the toolchain to take Wasm Components written in other

Reviewer 3: Stabilizing the `transpilation` and Node.js WASI polyfills perhaps?

Author: That would require explaining what `transpilation` is, as well as what a "Node.js WASI polyfill" is. You and I know what that means; but I expect the people reading this post to be more interested in what Jco allows them to do - which is use Wasm Components written in other languages in Node.js. Which is why this focuses on that.

Reviewer: yeah: transpilation is *currently* unimportant to a user trying to understand what this _does for them_ at first blush. In the normal case, we typically help the reader find the happy path (often joked as "five minutes to dopamine") without needing to understand what's happening; THEN go back or push another post that explains what is happening.

transpiling is a term of art; and one that not a lot of people will know unless they're in the domain themselves.

Reviewer: but the concept and these terms of art _(polyfill, transpile)_ are totally in scope for a later jco post, or the documentation. Here's what wikipedia says about transpile: `Transpiling converts source code from a programming language into an equivalent source code of the same or a different programming language.` which is right! But in this post, we'd just write, "jco takes components written in other languages and creates JavaScript that enables Node to use them directly." or something. you could _introduce_ that process as transpiling, but now you're teaching people techniques and _not jco usage_.

Reviewer 3: Yeah this makes sense, although the framing of "transpile" in the project is very specifically chosen to appeal to JS developers (which are a subset of the audience I know, but still an important one).

Reviewer 3: Yeah there's a lot to explain, so it makes sense not to let these technicalities introduce even more.

languages and import them from JavaScript. What is also included but not yet
stable are: the browser runtime for Wasm Components and the JavaScript to Wasm
Component compiler. This functionality can already be used experimentally, but

> needs additional work to bring it up to the standard we expect.

Reviewer 3: Could even mention these areas are still under active development.

Author: yess, good call. Done!

Reviewer 3: Great, can you push the new changes to review?

## JavaScript Toolchains in the Bytecode Alliance

Jco is the third JS toolchain project which is part of the Bytecode Alliance. To
help people navigate this, here is a quick overview of the three projects and
what their purpose is at the time of writing:

- [Javy](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/javy): A JavaScript → WASI
toolchain built for WASI 0.1. This work predates Wasm Components, but Component
support may be added in the future.

> - [ComponentizeJS](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/ComponentizeJS): A
> JavaScript → WASI toolchain built for WASI 0.2 and Wasm Components. This project
> is newer and not yet considered stable.

Reviewer 3: Another suggestion here (something along the lines of):

```suggestion
- [ComponentizeJS](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/ComponentizeJS): A
JavaScript → Component toolchain with support for WASI 0.2, to embed Spidermonkey
and JS guest code as a WebAssembly component entirely from JavaScript without having to configure a C++ build system. This project is still experimental and not yet considered stable.
```

Author: Oh yeah, calling out the different JS engines is a good call! - updated the sections to make note of that. Ty!

- [Jco](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/jco): A comprehensive WASI compiler
toolchain and runtime for JavaScript. This includes a WASI → JS toolchain built
for WASI 0.2 and Wasm Components.

The goal is for Jco to eventually evolve into a comprehensive toolchain for all

> WASI and JavaScript needs. The command `jco componentize` uses ComponentizeJS

Reviewer 3: `WASI support and JavaScript component needs`?

Author: done!

under the covers, so as jco matures you shouldn't have to think about

> ComponentizeJS much, if at all.

Reviewer 3: It already does this today, so perhaps something like:

"providing an easy to use workflow for authoring JavaScript components without having to figure out complex embedding build system configurations (once this project matures towards stability)."

Author: I tried to adopt the spirit of your suggestion here, but keeping the tone in line with the rest of the post. I hope that I captured the core of it!

cool*! By leveraging WIT and Wasm, we've been able to define a language-agnostic
interface which resulted in strongly typed code for both programming languages.
And by leveraging code generation, all of the hard FFI and data marshalling bits
have been handled for us - enabling us to focus on what is truly important
(screaming we want tuna).

In this example we happened to use JavaScript and Rust in order to demo the Jco
runtime. But what's important to understand is that this could have just as
easily been using JavaScript and Go. Or Rust and Python. The point of the Wasm
Components and WASI is that we can connect any number of languages to each other
via a strongly typed ABI.

We've intentionally kept things fairly simple: one method which takes strings
in, and returns strings out. However the [latest version of
WASI](https://bytecodealliance.org/articles/WASI-0.2) (0.2) provides among other
things access to asynchronous sockets, timers, and http. Using the same broad
techniques we've shown in this post, it should be possible to for example write
your networked applications using different languages, all linked to one another
using strongly typed WIT interfaces.

## Conclusion

> In this post we’ve introduce Jco 1.0.0: a native JavaScript runtime which can

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this post we’ve introduced Jco 1.0.0: a native JavaScript runtime which can
```

---
title: "Announcing Jco 1.0"
author: "Yosh Wuyts"
date: "2024-02-22"
github_name: "yoshuawuyts"
excerpt_separator: <!--end_excerpt-->
---

We’re happy to announce the 1.0 release of [Jco][jco]: a native Javascript
WebAssembly toolchain and runtime built for WebAssembly Components and [WASI
0.2](https://bytecodealliance.org/articles/WASI-0.2) [^wasi-one-liner]. Jco can
natively run Wasm Components inside of Node.js, making it easy to take libraries
written in different programming languages and execute them using the Node.js
runtime. And by implementing the entirety of the WASI 0.2 API surface, those
components can access the network, filesystem, and other system APIs available
in the Node.js runtime.

[^wasi-one-liner]: WebAssembly Components are an extension to WebAssembly to
create strongly typed interfaces between different programs. WASI 0.2 is a
re-work of the "WebAssembly System Interfaces" based on WebAssembly Components.
The previous version of WASI was not based on components, and as a result was
rather limited in what it could express.

<!--end_excerpt-->

Our goal is for Jco to be a comprehensive tool for all Component-related

> operations for JavaScript. With Jco 1.0 we're stabilizing a Node.js runtime for

Reviewer 3: This sentence is very similarly repeated again on line 52. Perhaps pick one or the other or distinguish them?

Author: I'll do away with the section on line 52. That would be the fifth revision of that section, and at this point I don't think it's worth keeping.

Wasm Components, as well as a toolchain to take Wasm Components written in other
languages and import them into JavaScript. From here on out we hope to continue
stabilizing more features for Jco. Some features are already available

> experimentally, including: native support for browser and Deno.js JavaScript

Reviewer 3: Strictly speaking, we don't currently support Deno.js at all due to some worker bugs, so might be best to remove this for now.

Author: yep removed

> stabilizing more features for Jco. Some features are already available
> experimentally, including native support for the browser. As well as native
> support for compiling JavaScript code into WebAssembly.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps join these sentences:

```suggestion
stabilizing more features for Jco. Some features are already available
experimentally including native support for the browser as well as native
support for compiling JavaScript code into WebAssembly.
```

Author: sure, changed the punctuation here to make it a single sentence. I'm trying to make sure it doesn't turn into a run-on though; so forgive my use of semis.

WebAssembly.

## JavaScript Toolchains in the Bytecode Alliance

Jco is the third JS toolchain project which is part of the Bytecode Alliance. To
help people navigate this, here is a quick overview of the three projects and
what their purpose is at the time of writing:

- [Javy](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/javy): A JavaScript → WASI
compiler toolchain built for WASI 0.1 using the [QuickJS JavaScript
engine](https://bellard.org/quickjs/). This work predates Wasm Components, but
Component support may be added in the future.
- [ComponentizeJS](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/ComponentizeJS): A
JavaScript → WASI compiler toolchain built for WASI 0.2 and Wasm Components.

> This project is newer and not yet considered stable.

Reviewer 3: It would still be great to get a clear summary of ComponentizeJS here. "Create components on Spidermonkey from JS" is the story. It supports _any_ world - WASI is just one.

Author: What is the difference between "any world" and "Wasm Components"?

Reviewer 3: I think the important clarifications to this are:

1. It is not at all WASI specific - it works for any world.
2. (optionally) It is built on Spidermonkey.

> - [Jco](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/jco): A comprehensive WASI compiler

Reviewer 3: Something more like "A comprehensive component compiler toolchain and runtime for JavaScript, including full support for WASI" would be my preference here, again feel free to reword as suitable.

Author: "component" is jargon which will be unfamiliar to almost everyone reading this blog post. Changing this to say "comprehensive WebAssembly Component compiler"

Reviewer 3: Sounds good.

toolchain with full support for WASI 0.2 built using the [SpiderMonkey

> JavaScript engine](https://spidermonkey.dev).

Reviewer 3: The second sentence here effectively repeats the componentizeJS definition, perhaps just say "also includes a ComponentizeJS wrapper" or something like that?

I know this is hard to communicate and we haven't made it easy to frame - but `jco componentize` is ComponentizeJS, perhaps there's a way to say that simply.

Author: I might just do away with this section since we're already mentioning it on line 27. This would be the fifth revision, and if we're still not getting it right then it's probably not worth keeping.

Author: I think this was posted on the wrong line? I suspect this was meant for line 52, which I've now removed (see earlier comment).

Reviewer 3: Line 47 says "A JavaScript → Wasm Component compiler toolchain", then line 51 again says "This includes a Wasm Component → JS" toolchain.

If I didn't know any better I'd think jco is doing the same thing as ComponentizeJS? It's confusing.

Reviewer 3: Latest looks good thanks. Some clarification around how componentize is made available in Jco could be useful, but it's certainly not necessary either.

engine](https://spidermonkey.dev).

The goal is for Jco to grow into a comprehensive toolchain which takes care of

> all JavaScript and WebAssembly interactions. Jco already experimentally exposes

Reviewer 3: Still would appreciate if we stick to component-specific here _"all JavaScript and Wasm component interactions"_.

Author: oh yeah, sure thing
